Part 9 Miscellaneous and general provisions CHAPTER 1 Miscellaneous Combined warrants and authorisations 212 Combination of warrants and authorisations


Schedule 8 (which makes provision for the combination of certain warrants and authorisations in a single instrument) has effect.
Compliance with Act 213 Payments towards certain compliance costs
(1) The Secretary of State must ensure that arrangements are in force for securing that telecommunications operators and postal operators receive an appropriate contribution in respect of such of their relevant costs as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.

(2) In subsection (1) “relevant costs” means costs incurred, or likely to be incurred,
by telecommunications operators and postal operators in complying with this Act.

(3) The arrangements may provide for payment of a contribution to be subject to terms and conditions determined by the Secretary of State.

(4) Such terms and conditions may, in particular, include a condition on the operator concerned to comply with any audit that may reasonably be required to monitor the claim for costs.

(5) The arrangements may provide for the Secretary of State to determine—
  (a) the scope and extent of the arrangements, and
  (b) the appropriate level of contribution which should be made in each case.

(6) Different levels of contribution may apply for different cases or descriptions of case but the appropriate contribution must never be nil.

(7) A retention notice under Part 4 given to a telecommunications operator or a postal operator, or a national security notice under section 216 given to a telecommunications operator, must specify the level or levels of contribution which the Secretary of State has determined should be made in respect of the costs incurred, or likely to be incurred, by the operator as a result of the notice in complying with that Part or (as the case may be) with the national security notice.

(8) For the purpose of complying with this section the Secretary of State may make, or arrange for the making of, payments out of money provided by Parliament.
214 Power to develop compliance systems etc.

(1) The Secretary of State may—
  (a) develop, provide, maintain or improve, or
  (b) enter into financial or other arrangements with any person for the development, provision, maintenance or improvement of,

such apparatus, systems or other facilities or services as the Secretary of State considers appropriate for enabling or otherwise facilitating compliance by the Secretary of State, another public authority or any other person with this Act.

(2) Arrangements falling within subsection (1)(b) may, in particular, include arrangements consisting of the giving of financial assistance by the Secretary of State.

(3) Such financial assistance—
  (a) may, in particular, be given by way of—
    (i) grant,
    (ii) loan,
    (iii) guarantee or indemnity,
    (iv) investment, or
    (v) incurring expenditure for the benefit of the person assisted, and
  (b) may be given subject to terms and conditions determined by the Secretary of State.

(4) Terms and conditions imposed by virtue of subsection (3)(b) may include terms and conditions as to repayment with or without interest.
Additional powers 215 Amendments of the Intelligence Services Act 1994
(1) The Intelligence Services Act 1994 is amended as follows.

(2) In section 3 (the Government Communications Headquarters)—
  (a) in subsection (1)(a), after “monitor” insert “, make use of”, and
  (b) in the words following subsection (1)(b)(ii), for the words from “or to any other organisation” to the end substitute “or, in such cases as it considers appropriate, to other organisations or persons, or to the general public, in the United Kingdom or elsewhere.”

(3) In section 5 (warrants: general)—
  (a) in subsection (2), omit “, subject to subsection (3) below,”
  (b) omit subsection (3),
  (c) in subsection (3A), after “1989” insert “, or on the application of the Intelligence Service or GCHQ for the purposes of the exercise of their functions by virtue of section 1(2)(c) or 3(2)(c),”.
216 National security notices
(1) The Secretary of State may give any telecommunications operator in the United Kingdom a notice (a “national security notice”) requiring the operator to take such specified steps as the Secretary of State considers necessary in the interests of national security.

(2) The Secretary of State may give a national security notice only if the Secretary of State considers that the conduct required by the notice is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

(3) A national security notice may, in particular, require the operator to whom it is given—
  (a) to carry out any conduct, including the provision of services or facilities, for the purpose of—
    (i) facilitating anything done by an intelligence service under any enactment other than this Act, or
    (ii) dealing with an emergency (within the meaning of Part 1 of the Civil Contingencies Act 2004);
  (b) to provide services or facilities for the purpose of assisting an intelligence service to carry out its functions more securely or more effectively.

(4) But a national security notice may not require the taking of any steps the main purpose of which is to do something for which a warrant or authorisation is required under this Act.

(5) A national security notice must specify such period as appears to the Secretary of State to be reasonable as the period within which the steps specified in the notice are to be taken.

(6) Sections 218 to 220 contain further provision about national security notices.
217 Maintenance of technical capability
(1) The Secretary of State may give a relevant operator a notice (a “technical capability notice”)—
  (a) imposing on the relevant operator any applicable obligations specified in the notice, and
  (b) requiring the person to take all the steps specified in the notice for the purpose of complying with those obligations.

(2) In this section—

    “applicable obligation”, in relation to a relevant operator of a particular description, means an obligation specified by the Secretary of State in regulations as an obligation that may be imposed on relevant operators,
    or on relevant operators of that description;

    “relevant operator” means—
    (a) a postal operator,
    (b) a telecommunications operator, or (c) a person who is proposing to become a postal operator or a telecommunications operator.

(3) Regulations under this section may specify an obligation that may be imposed on any relevant operators only if the Secretary of State considers it is reasonable to do so for the purpose of securing—
  (a) that it is (and remains) practicable to impose requirements on those relevant operators to provide assistance in relation to relevant authorisations (see subsection (9)), and
  (b) that it is (and remains) practicable for those relevant operators to comply with those requirements.

(4) The obligations that may be specified in regulations under this section include,
among other things—
  (a) obligations to provide facilities or services of a specified description;
  (b) obligations relating to apparatus owned or operated by a relevant operator;
  (c) obligations relating to the removal by a relevant operator of electronic protection applied by or on behalf of that operator to any communications or data;
  (d) obligations relating to the security of any postal or telecommunications services provided by a relevant operator;
  (e) obligations relating to the handling or disclosure of any information.

(5) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State must consult the following persons—
  (a) the Technical Advisory Board,
  (b) persons appearing to the Secretary of State to be likely to be subject to any obligations specified in the regulations,
  (c) persons representing persons falling within paragraph (b), and
  (d) persons with statutory functions in relation to persons falling within that paragraph.

(6) The only steps that may be specified in a technical capability notice given to a person are steps which the Secretary of State considers to be necessary for securing that the person has the capability to provide any assistance which the person may be required to provide in relation to any relevant authorisation.

(7) A technical capability notice must specify such period as appears to the Secretary of State to be reasonable as the period within which the steps specified in the notice are to be taken.

(8) A technical capability notice may be given to persons outside the United Kingdom (and may require things to be done, or not to be done, outside the United Kingdom).

(9) In this section “relevant authorisation” means—
  (a) any warrant issued under Part 2, 5 or 6, or
  (b) any authorisation or notice given under Part 3.

(10) Sections 218 to 220 contain further provision about technical capability notices.
218 Further provision about notices under section 216 or 217
(1) In this section “relevant notice” means—
  (a) a national security notice under section 216, or
  (b) a technical capability notice under section 217.

(2) Before giving a relevant notice to a person, the Secretary of State must consult that person.

(3) Before giving a relevant notice, the Secretary of State must, among other matters, take into account—
  (a) the likely benefits of the notice,
  (b) the likely number of users (if known) of any postal or telecommunications service to which the notice relates,
  (c) the technical feasibility of complying with the notice,
  (d) the likely cost of complying with the notice, and
  (e) any other effect of the notice on the person (or description of person) to whom it relates.

(4) Where the relevant notice would impose any obligations relating to the removal by a person of electronic protection applied by or on behalf of that person to any communications or data, in complying with subsection (3) the Secretary of State must in particular take into account the technical feasibility,
and likely cost, of complying with those obligations.

(5) A relevant notice must be in writing.

(6) A technical capability notice may be given to a person outside the United Kingdom in any of the following ways (as well as by electronic or other means of giving a notice)—
  (a) by delivering it to the person’s principal office within the United Kingdom or, if the person has no such office in the United Kingdom, to any place in the United Kingdom where the person carries on business or conducts activities;
  (b) if the person has specified an address in the United Kingdom as one at which the person, or someone on the person’s behalf, will accept documents of the same description as a notice, by delivering it to that address.

(7) The Secretary of State may by regulations make further provision about the giving of relevant notices.

(8) A person to whom a relevant notice is given, or any person employed or engaged for the purposes of that person’s business, must not disclose the existence or contents of the notice to any other person without the permission of the Secretary of State.

(9) A person to whom a relevant notice is given must comply with the notice.

(10) The duty imposed by subsection (9) is enforceable—
  (a) in relation to a person in the United Kingdom, and
  (b) so far as relating to a technical capability notice within subsection (11),
in relation to a person outside the United Kingdom,

by civil proceedings by the Secretary of State for an injunction, or for specific performance of a statutory duty under section 45 of the Court of Session Act 1988, or for any other appropriate relief.

(11) A technical capability notice is within this subsection if it relates to any of the following—
  (a) a targeted interception warrant or mutual assistance warrant under Chapter 1 of Part 2;
  (b) a bulk interception warrant;
  (c) an authorisation or notice given under Part 3.
219 Variation and revocation of notices
(1) In this section “relevant notice” means—
  (a) a national security notice under section 216, or
  (b) a technical capability notice under section 217.

(2) The Secretary of State must keep each relevant notice under review.

(3) The Secretary of State may—
  (a) vary a relevant notice;
  (b) revoke a relevant notice (whether wholly or in part).
4) The Secretary of State may vary a national security notice only if the Secretary of State considers that the conduct required by the notice as varied is proportionate to what is sought to be achieved by that conduct.

(5) If the Secretary of State varies or revokes a relevant notice given to any person,
the Secretary of State must give that person notice of the variation or revocation.

(6) Subsections (2) to (4) and (7) of section 218 apply in relation to varying or revoking a relevant notice as they apply in relation to giving a relevant notice.

(7) Subsections (5) and (6) of section 218 apply to any notice of the variation or revocation of a relevant notice as they apply to a relevant notice.

(8) The fact that a relevant notice has been revoked in relation to a particular person (or description of persons) does not prevent the giving of another relevant notice of the same kind in relation to the same person (or description of persons).

(9) Any reference in this section or section 218(8) to (11) to a notice given under section 216 or 217 includes a reference to such a notice as varied under this section.
220 Review by the Secretary of State
(1) A person who is given a notice under section 216 or 217 may, within such period or circumstances as may be provided for by regulations made by the Secretary of State, refer the notice back to the Secretary of State.

(2) Such a reference may be in relation to the whole of a notice or any aspect of it.

(3) There is no requirement for a person who has referred a notice under subsection (1) to comply with the notice, so far as referred, until the Secretary of State has reviewed the notice in accordance with subsection (4).

(4) The Secretary of State must review any notice so far as referred to the Secretary of State under subsection (1).

(5) Before deciding the review, the Secretary of State must consult—
  (a) the Technical Advisory Board, and
  (b) the Investigatory Powers Commissioner.

(6) The Board must consider the technical requirements and the financial consequences, for the person who has made the reference, of the notice so far as referred.

(7) The Commissioner must consider whether the notice so far as referred is proportionate.

(8) The Board and the Commissioner must—
  (a) give the person concerned and the Secretary of State the opportunity to provide evidence, or make representations, to them before reaching their conclusions, and
  (b) report their conclusions to—
    (i) the person, and
    (ii) the Secretary of State.

(9) The Secretary of State may, after considering the conclusions of the Board and the Commissioner—
  (a) vary or revoke the notice under section 219, or
  (b) give a notice under this section to the person confirming its effect.

(10) Subsections (5) to (8) of section 218 apply in relation to a notice under subsection (9)(b) above as they apply in relation to a notice under section 216 or 217.

(11) Any reference in this section to a notice under section 216 or 217 includes such a notice as varied under section 219, but only so far as the variation is concerned.

But it does not include a notice varied as mentioned in subsection (9)(a) above.
Wireless telegraphy 221 Amendments of the Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006
(1) The Wireless Telegraphy Act 2006 is amended as follows.

(2) Section 48 (interception and disclosure of messages) is amended as follows.

(3) In subsection (1), for “otherwise than under the authority of a designated person” substitute “without lawful authority”.

(4) After subsection (3) insert—

“(3A) A person does not commit an offence under this section consisting in any conduct if the conduct—
  (a) constitutes an offence under section 2 of the Investigatory Powers Act 2016 (offence of unlawful interception), or
  (b) would do so in the absence of any lawful authority (within the meaning of section 5 of that Act).”

(5) Omit subsection (5).

(6) Omit section 49 (interception authorities).

(7) In consequence of the repeal made by subsection (6)—
  (a) in sections 50(5) and 119(2)(a), for “49” substitute “48”;
  (b) in section 121(2), omit paragraph (b).
CHAPTER 2 General Review of operation of Act 222 Review of operation of Act
(1) The Secretary of State must, within the period of 6 months beginning with the end of the initial period, prepare a report on the operation of this Act.

(2) In subsection (1) “the initial period” is the period of 5 years and 6 months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed.

(3) In preparing the report under subsection (1), the Secretary of State must, in particular, take account of any report on the operation of this Act made by a Select Committee of either House of Parliament (whether acting alone or jointly).

(4) The Secretary of State must—
  (a) publish the report prepared under subsection (1), and
  (b) lay a copy of it before Parliament.
Interpretation 223 Telecommunications definitions
(1) The definitions in this section have effect for the purposes of this Act.

Communication
(2) “Communication”, in relation to a telecommunications operator,
telecommunications service or telecommunication system, includes—
  (a) anything comprising speech, music, sounds, visual images or data of any description, and
  (b) signals serving either for the impartation of anything between persons,
between a person and a thing or between things or for the actuation or control of any apparatus.

Entity data
(3) “Entity data” means any data which—
  (a) is about—
    (i) an entity,
    (ii) an association between a telecommunications service and an entity, or
    (iii) an association between any part of a telecommunication system and an entity,
  (b) consists of, or includes, data which identifies or describes the entity (whether or not by reference to the entity’s location), and
  (c) is not events data.

Events data
(4) “Events data” means any data which identifies or describes an event (whether or not by reference to its location) on, in or by means of a telecommunication system where the event consists of one or more entities engaging in a specific activity at a specific time.

Communications data
(5) “Communications data”, in relation to a telecommunications operator,
telecommunications service or telecommunication system, means entity data or events data—
  (a) which is (or is to be or is capable of being) held or obtained by, or on behalf of, a telecommunications operator and—
    (i) is about an entity to which a telecommunications service is provided and relates to the provision of the service,
    (ii) is comprised in, included as part of, attached to or logically associated with a communication (whether by the sender or otherwise) for the purposes of a telecommunication system by means of which the communication is being or may be transmitted, or
    (iii) does not fall within sub-paragraph (i) or (ii) but does relate to the use of a telecommunications service or a telecommunication system,
  (b) which is available directly from a telecommunication system and falls within sub-paragraph (ii) of paragraph (a), or
  (c) which—
    (i) is (or is to be or is capable of being) held or obtained by, or on behalf of, a telecommunications operator,
    (ii) is about the architecture of a telecommunication system, and
    (iii) is not about a specific person,

but does not include any content of a communication or anything which, in the absence of subsection (6)(b), would be content of a communication.

Content of a communication
(6) “Content”, in relation to a communication and a telecommunications operator,
telecommunications service or telecommunication system, means any element of the communication, or any data attached to or logically associated with the communication, which reveals anything of what might reasonably be considered to be the meaning (if any) of the communication, but—
  (a) any meaning arising from the fact of the communication or from any data relating to the transmission of the communication is to be disregarded, and
  (b) anything which is systems data is not content.

Other definitions
(7) “Entity” means a person or thing.

(8) “Public telecommunications service” means any telecommunications service which is offered or provided to the public, or a substantial section of the public,
in any one or more parts of the United Kingdom.

(9) “Public telecommunication system” means a telecommunication system located in the United Kingdom—
  (a) by means of which any public telecommunications service is provided,
or
  (b) which consists of parts of any other telecommunication system by means of which any such service is provided.

(10) “Telecommunications operator” means a person who—
  (a) offers or provides a telecommunications service to persons in the United Kingdom, or
  (b) controls or provides a telecommunication system which is (wholly or partly)—
    (i) in the United Kingdom, or
    (ii) controlled from the United Kingdom.

(11) “Telecommunications service” means any service that consists in the provision of access to, and of facilities for making use of, any telecommunication system (whether or not one provided by the person providing the service).

(12) For the purposes of subsection (11), the cases in which a service is to be taken to consist in the provision of access to, and of facilities for making use of, a telecommunication system include any case where a service consists in or includes facilitating the creation, management or storage of communications transmitted, or that may be transmitted, by means of such a system.

(13) “Telecommunication system” means a system (including the apparatus comprised in it) that exists (whether wholly or partly in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) for the purpose of facilitating the transmission of communications by any means involving the use of electrical or electromagnetic energy.

(14) “Private telecommunication system” means any telecommunication system which—
  (a) is not a public telecommunication system,
  (b) is attached, directly or indirectly, to a public telecommunication system (whether or not for the purposes of the communication in question),
and
  (c) includes apparatus which is both located in the United Kingdom and used (with or without other apparatus) for making the attachment to that public telecommunication system.
224 Postal definitions
(1) The definitions in this section have effect for the purposes of this Act.

Communication
(2) “Communication”, in relation to a postal operator or postal service (but not in the definition of “postal service” in this section), includes anything transmitted by a postal service.

Communications data
(3) “Communications data”, in relation to a postal operator or postal service,
means—
  (a) postal data comprised in, included as part of, attached to or logically associated with a communication (whether by the sender or otherwise)
for the purposes of a postal service by means of which it is being or may be transmitted,
  (b) information about the use made by any person of a postal service (but excluding any content of a communication (apart from information within paragraph (a)), or
  (c) information not within paragraph (a) or (b) that is (or is to be) held or obtained by or on behalf of a person providing a postal service, is about those to whom the service is provided by that person and relates to the service so provided.

Postal data
(4) “Postal data” means data which—
  (a) identifies, or purports to identify, any person, apparatus or location to or from which a communication is or may be transmitted,
  (b) identifies or selects, or purports to identify or select, apparatus through which, or by means of which, a communication is or may be transmitted,
  (c) identifies, or purports to identify, the time at which an event relating to a communication occurs, or
  (d) identifies the data or other data as data comprised in, included as part of, attached to or logically associated with a particular communication.

For the purposes of this definition “data”, in relation to a postal item, includes anything written on the outside of the item.

Other definitions
(5) “Postal item” means—
  (a) any letter, postcard or other such thing in writing as may be used by the sender for imparting information to the recipient, or
  (b) any packet or parcel.

(6) “Postal operator” means a person providing a postal service to persons in the United Kingdom.

(7) “Postal service” means a service that—
  (a) consists in the following, or in any one or more of them, namely, the collection, sorting, conveyance, distribution and delivery (whether in the United Kingdom or elsewhere) of postal items, and
  (b) has as its main purpose, or one of its main purposes, to make available,
or to facilitate, a means of transmission from place to place of postal items containing communications.

(8) “Public postal service” means a postal service that is offered or provided to the public, or a substantial section of the public, in any one or more parts of the United Kingdom.
225 General definitions
(1) In this Act—

    “apparatus” includes any equipment, machinery or device (whether physical or logical) and any wire or cable,

    “civil proceedings” means any proceedings in or before any court or tribunal that are not criminal proceedings,

    “crime” means conduct which—
    (a) constitutes one or more criminal offences, or (b) is, or corresponds to, any conduct which, if it all took place in any one part of the United Kingdom, would constitute one or more criminal offences,

    “criminal proceedings” includes proceedings before a court in respect of a service offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006 (and references to criminal prosecutions are to be read accordingly),

    “data” includes data which is not electronic data and any information (whether or not electronic),

    “destroy”, in relation to electronic data, means delete the data in such a way as to make access to the data impossible (and related expressions are to be read accordingly),

    “enactment” means an enactment whenever passed or made; and includes—
    (a) an enactment contained in subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978,
    (b) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, an Act of the Scottish Parliament,
    (c) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under, a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, and (d) an enactment contained in, or in an instrument made under,
    Northern Ireland legislation,

    “enhanced affirmative procedure” is to be read in accordance with section 229,

    “functions” includes powers and duties,

    “GCHQ” has the same meaning as in the Intelligence Services Act 1994,

    “head”, in relation to an intelligence service, means—
    (a) in relation to the Security Service, the Director-General,
    (b) in relation to the Secret Intelligence Service, the Chief, and (c) in relation to GCHQ, the Director,

    “Her Majesty’s forces” has the same meaning as in the Armed Forces Act 2006,

    “identifying data” has the meaning given by subsection (2),

    “intelligence service” means the Security Service, the Secret Intelligence Service or GCHQ,

    “the Investigatory Powers Commissioner” means the person appointed under section 194(1)(a) (and the expression is also to be read in accordance with section 194(8)(b)),

    “the Investigatory Powers Tribunal” means the tribunal established under section 65 of the Regulation of Investigatory Powers Act 2000,

    “items subject to legal privilege”—
    (a) in relation to England and Wales, has the same meaning as in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (see section 10 of that Act),
    (b) in relation to Scotland, means—
    (i) communications between a professional legal adviser and the adviser’s client, or (ii) communications made in connection with, or in contemplation of, legal proceedings and for the purposes of those proceedings,

    which would, by virtue of any rule of law relating to the confidentiality of communications, be protected in legal proceedings from disclosure, and (c) in relation to Northern Ireland, has the same meaning as in the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12)S.I. 1989/1341 (N.I. 12)) (see Article 12 of that Order),

    “Judicial Commissioner” means a person appointed under section 194(1)(a) or (b) (and the expression is therefore to be read in accordance with section 194(8)(a)),

    “legal proceedings” means—
    (a) civil or criminal proceedings in or before a court or tribunal, or (b) proceedings before an officer in respect of a service offence within the meaning of the Armed Forces Act 2006,

    “modify” includes amend, repeal or revoke (and related expressions are to be read accordingly),

    “person” (other than in Parts 2 and 5) includes an organisation and any association or combination of persons,

    “person holding office under the Crown” includes any servant of the Crown and any member of Her Majesty’s forces,

    “primary legislation” means—
    (a) an Act of Parliament,
    (b) an Act of the Scottish Parliament,
    (c) a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales, or (d) Northern Ireland legislation,

    “public authority” means a public authority within the meaning of section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, other than a court or tribunal,

    “serious crime” means crime where—
    (a) the offence, or one of the offences, which is or would be constituted by the conduct concerned is an offence for which a person who has reached the age of 18 (or, in relation to Scotland or Northern Ireland, 21) and has no previous convictions could reasonably be expected to be sentenced to imprisonment for a term of 3 years or more, or (b) the conduct involves the use of violence, results in substantial financial gain or is conduct by a large number of persons in pursuit of a common purpose,

    “specified”, in relation to an authorisation, warrant, notice or regulations,
    means specified or described in the authorisation, warrant, notice or (as the case may be) regulations (and “specify” is to be read accordingly),

    “subordinate legislation” means—
    (a) subordinate legislation within the meaning of the Interpretation Act 1978, or (b) an instrument made under an Act of the Scottish Parliament,
    Northern Ireland legislation or a Measure or Act of the National Assembly for Wales,

    “systems data” has the meaning given by subsection (4),

    “the Technical Advisory Board” means the Board provided for by section 211,

    “working day” means a day other than a Saturday, a Sunday, Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday under the Banking and Financial Dealings Act 1971 in any part of the United Kingdom.

(2) In this Act “identifying data” means—
  (a) data which may be used to identify, or assist in identifying, any person,
apparatus, system or service,
  (b) data which may be used to identify any event, or
  (c) data which may be used to identify the location of any person, event or thing.

(3) For the purposes of subsection (2), the reference to data which may be used to identify any event includes—
  (a) data relating to the fact of the event;
  (b) data relating to the type, method or pattern of event;
  (c) data relating to the time or duration of the event.

(4) In this Act “systems data” means any data that enables or facilitates, or identifies or describes anything connected with enabling or facilitating, the functioning of any of the following—
  (a) a postal service;
  (b) a telecommunication system (including any apparatus forming part of the system);
  (c) any telecommunications service provided by means of a telecommunication system;
  (d) a relevant system (including any apparatus forming part of the system);
  (e) any service provided by means of a relevant system.

(5) For the purposes of subsection (4), a system is a “relevant system” if any communications or other information are held on or by means of the system.

(6) For the purposes of this Act detecting crime or serious crime is to be taken to include—
  (a) establishing by whom, for what purpose, by what means and generally in what circumstances any crime or (as the case may be) serious crime was committed, and
  (b) the apprehension of the person by whom any crime or (as the case may be) serious crime was committed.

(7) References in this Act to the examination of material obtained under a warrant are references to the material being read, looked at or listened to by the persons to whom it becomes available as a result of the warrant.
226 Index of defined expressions
In this Act, the expressions listed in the left-hand column have the meaning given by, or are to be interpreted in accordance with, the provisions listed in the right-hand column.
Expression 	Provision Apparatus 	Section 225(1)
Bulk equipment interference warrant 	Section 154(1)
Bulk interception warrant 	Section 119(1)
Civil proceedings 	Section 225(1)
Communication 	Sections 223(2) and 224(2)
Communications data 	Sections 223(5) and 224(3)
Content of a communication (in relation to a telecommunications operator, telecommunications service or telecommunication system) 	Section 223(6)

Crime 	Section 225(1)
Criminal proceedings 	Section 225(1)
Criminal prosecution 	Section 225(1)
Data 	Section 225(1)
Expression 	Provision Destroy (in relation to electronic data) and related expressions 	Section 225(1)
Detecting crime or serious crime 	Section 225(6)
Enactment 	Section 225(1)
Enhanced affirmative procedure 	Section 225(1)
Entity 	Section 223(7)
Entity data 	Section 223(3)
Events data 	Section 223(4)
Examination (in relation to material obtained under a warrant) 	Section 225(7)
Functions 	Section 225(1)
GCHQ 	Section 225(1)
Head (in relation to an intelligence service) 	Section 225(1)
Her Majesty’s forces 	Section 225(1)
Identifying data 	Section 225(2) and (3)
Intelligence service 	Section 225(1)
Interception of communication (postal service) 	Sections 3(7) and 4 Interception of communication (telecommunication system) 	Sections 3(1) to (6) and 4(1)
Interception of communication in the United Kingdom 	Section 3(8)
Internet connection record 	Section 54(6)
Investigatory Powers Commissioner 	Section 225(1)
Investigatory Powers Tribunal 	Section 225(1)
Items subject to legal privilege 	Section 225(1)
Judicial Commissioner 	Section 225(1)
Judicial Commissioners 	Section 194(6)
Lawful authority (in relation to interception of communication) 	Section 5 Legal proceedings 	Section 225(1)
Modify (and related expressions) 	Section 225(1)
Person (other than in Parts 2 and 5) 	Section 225(1)
Person holding office under the Crown 	Section 225(1)
Postal data 	Section 224(4)
Postal item 	Section 224(5)
Postal item in course of transmission by postal service 	Section 3(7)
Expression 	Provision Postal operator 	Section 224(6)
Postal service 	Section 224(7)
Primary legislation 	Section 225(1)
Private telecommunication system 	Section 223(14)
Public authority 	Section 225(1)
Public postal service 	Section 224(8)
Public telecommunications service 	Section 223(8)
Public telecommunication system 	Section 223(9)
Serious crime 	Section 225(1)
Source of journalistic information 	Section 68(7)
Specified and specify (in relation to an authorisation,
warrant, notice or regulations) 	Section 225(1)
Subordinate legislation 	Section 225(1)
Systems data 	Section 225(4) and (5)
Technical Advisory Board 	Section 225(1)
Telecommunications operator 	Section 223(10)
Telecommunications service 	Section 223(11) and (12)
Telecommunication system 	Section 223(13)
Working day 	Section 225(1)
Supplementary provision 227 Offences by bodies corporate etc.

(1) This section applies if an offence under this Act is committed by a body corporate or a Scottish partnership.

(2) If the offence is proved to have been committed with the consent or connivance of, or to be attributable to any neglect on the part of—
  (a) a senior officer of the body corporate or Scottish partnership, or
  (b) a person purporting to act in such a capacity,

the senior officer or person (as well as the body corporate or partnership) is guilty of the offence and liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.

(3) In this section—

    “director”, in relation to a body corporate whose affairs are managed by its members, means a member of the body corporate,

    “senior officer” means—
    (a) in relation to a body corporate, a director, manager, secretary or other similar officer of the body corporate, and (b) in relation to a Scottish partnership, a partner in the partnership.

228 Regulations
(1) Any power of the Secretary of State or the Treasury to make regulations under this Act—
  (a) is exercisable by statutory instrument,
  (b) may be exercised so as to make different provision for different purposes or different areas, and
  (c) includes power to make supplementary, incidental, consequential,
transitional, transitory or saving provision.

(2) See sections 63(3) and 64(6) for the procedure for a statutory instrument containing regulations under section 62 to which section 63 applies or (as the case may be) regulations under section 64(4) to which section 64(5) applies (enhanced affirmative procedure).

(3) A statutory instrument containing regulations under—
  (a) section 10(4) or 232(2) which amend or repeal any provision of primary legislation,
  (b) section 39(2),
  (c) section 45(4),
  (d) section 74,
  (e) section 80(1),
  (f) section 205,
  (g) section 211,
  (h) section 217,
    (i) section 220(1), or
  (j) paragraph 33 of Schedule 8,

may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.

(4) A statutory instrument containing—
  (a) regulations under section 10(4) or 232(2) to which subsection (3) does not apply,
  (b) regulations under section 56(5), or
  (c) regulations under paragraph 2(1)(b) of Schedule 5,

is (if a draft of the instrument has not been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament) subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

(5) A statutory instrument containing—
  (a) regulations under section 8(3),
  (b) regulations under section 50(7)(a),
  (c) regulations under section 62 to which section 63 does not apply,
  (d) regulations under section 64(4) to which section 64(5) does not apply,
  (e) regulations under section 115(6)(a), or
  (f) regulations under section 218(7),

is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of either House of Parliament.

(6) A statutory instrument containing regulations under paragraph 4 of Schedule 5 is subject to annulment in pursuance of a resolution of the House of Commons.

(7) See paragraphs 4(4) and 5(5) of Schedule 7 for the procedure for a statutory instrument containing regulations about the coming into force of a code of practice under that Schedule or of any revisions to such a code of practice (affirmative procedure or, in the case of the coming into force of revisions, a choice between that procedure and laying before Parliament after being made).

(8) A statutory instrument containing regulations which are subject to a particular parliamentary procedure under this Act may also include regulations which are subject to a different or no parliamentary procedure under this Act (but this subsection does not apply to regulations mentioned in subsection (2), (4), (6) or (7)).

(9) A statutory instrument which, by virtue of subsection (8), contains regulations which are subject to different parliamentary procedures, or one or more parliamentary procedure and no parliamentary procedure, is subject to whichever procedure is the higher procedure; and the order is as follows (the highest first)—
  (a) the procedure set out in subsection (3) (the affirmative procedure),
  (b) the procedure set out in subsection (5) above (the negative procedure),
  (c) no procedure.

(10) Provision is not prevented from being included in regulations made under this Act merely because the provision could have been included in other regulations made under this Act which would have been subject to a different or no parliamentary procedure.
229 Enhanced affirmative procedure
(1) For the purposes of regulations under section 62 to which section 63 applies and regulations under section 64(4) to which section 64(5) applies, the enhanced affirmative procedure is as follows.

(2) Subsection (3) applies if—
  (a) the Secretary of State has consulted under section 63(2) or (as the case may be) 64(5) in relation to making such regulations,
  (b) a period of at least 12 weeks, beginning with the day on which any such consultation first began, has elapsed, and
  (c) the Secretary of State considers it appropriate to proceed with making such regulations.

(3) The Secretary of State must lay before Parliament—
  (a) draft regulations, and
  (b) a document which explains the regulations.

(4) The Secretary of State may make regulations in the terms of the draft regulations laid under subsection (3) if, after the end of the 40-day period, the draft regulations are approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament.

(5) But subsections (6) to (9) apply instead of subsection (4) if—
  (a) either House of Parliament so resolves within the 30-day period, or
  (b) a committee of either House charged with reporting on the draft regulations so recommends within the 30-day period and the House to which the recommendation is made does not by resolution reject the recommendation within that period.

(6) The Secretary of State must have regard to—
  (a) any representations,
  (b) any resolution of either House of Parliament, and
  (c) any recommendations of a committee of either House of Parliament charged with reporting on the draft regulations,

made during the 60-day period with regard to the draft regulations.

(7) If after the end of the 60-day period the draft regulations are approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament, the Secretary of State may make regulations in the terms of the draft regulations.

(8) If after the end of the 60-day period the Secretary of State wishes to proceed with the draft regulations but with material changes, the Secretary of State may lay before Parliament—
  (a) revised draft regulations, and
  (b) a statement giving a summary of the changes proposed.

(9) If the revised draft regulations are approved by a resolution of each House of Parliament, the Secretary of State may make regulations in the terms of the revised draft regulations.

(10) For the purposes of this section regulations are made in the terms of draft regulations or revised draft regulations if they contain no material changes to the provisions of the draft, or revised draft, regulations.

(11) References in this section to the “30-day”, “40-day” and “60-day” periods in relation to any draft regulations are to the periods of 30, 40 and 60 days beginning with the day on which the draft regulations were laid before Parliament; and, for this purpose, no account is to be taken of any time during which Parliament is dissolved or prorogued or during which either House is adjourned for more than four days.
230 Financial provisions
There is to be paid out of money provided by Parliament—
  (a) any expenditure incurred by a Minister of the Crown or government department by virtue of this Act, and
  (b) any increase attributable to this Act in the sums payable by virtue of any other Act out of money so provided.
231 Transitional, transitory or saving provision
(1) Schedule 9 (which contains transitional, transitory and saving provision including a general saving for lawful conduct) has effect.

(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make such transitional, transitory or saving provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in connection with the coming into force of any provision of this Act.
232 Minor and consequential provision
(1) Schedule 10 (which contains minor and consequential provision) has effect.

(2) The Secretary of State may by regulations make such provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate in consequence of this Act.

(3) The power to make regulations under subsection (2) may, in particular, be exercised by modifying any provision made by or under an enactment.
Final provision 233 Commencement, extent and short title
(1) Subject to subsections (2) and (3), this Act comes into force on such day as the Secretary of State may by regulations appoint; and different days may be appointed for different purposes.

(2) Sections 222 to 230, 231(2), 232(2) and (3) and this section come into force on the day on which this Act is passed.

(3) Sections 194 and 195 come into force at the end of the period of two months beginning with the day on which this Act is passed.

(4) Subject to subsections (5) and (6), this Act extends to England and Wales,
Scotland and Northern Ireland.

(5) An amendment, repeal or revocation of an enactment has the same extent as the enactment amended, repealed or revoked.

(6) Her Majesty may by Order in Council provide for any of the provisions of this Act to extend, with or without modifications, to any of the British overseas territories.

(7) This Act may be cited as the Investigatory Powers Act 2016.